ds-prove (#2)
ethereum/fv-blog: _posts/2020-12-09-symbolic-execution-with-ds-test.md

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Installation

If you want to follow along with the examples in this blog post, you need to install the
[`nix`](https://nixos.org/) package manager, and then install the
[`dapptools`](https://github.com/dapphub/dapptools) toolkit:

```sh
# user must be in sudoers
curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh

# Run this or login again to use Nix
. "$HOME/.nix-profile/etc/profile.d/nix.sh"

# install dapptools
curl https://dapp.tools/install | sh
```

You can start a new `dapp` project by running `dapp init` inside of an empty directory, this will
install `ds-test` as a submodule, and prepare the expected folder layout. A skeleton test file will
have been created at `src/<PROJECT_NAME>.t.sol`. You can run `dapp test` from the root of the
project to execute the unit tests, and `dapp help test` to get an overview of the available command
line options.

## What Is Symbolic Execution?

Symbolic execution is a program analysis technique that keeps some of the program state in an
abstract form, meaning that instead of being set to a specific value, these portions of the state

> are represented as a name with some constraints attached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are represented by a variable with some constraints attached.
```

To make this more specific, consider the contract below:

```solidity
contract Add {
    function add(uint x, uint y) external pure returns (uint z) {
        require((z = x + y) >= x, "overflow!");
    }
}
```

> When executing the `add` method symbolically we represent the calldata as two abstract variables
> (`x` and `y`) that are constrained so their value can only fit in the range of a `uint256`. As we
> proceed through the program, we will encounter various potential branching points (for example a
> `JUMPI` instruction). If both sides of the branching point are reachable (determined by checking if
> the conjunction of all existing constraints and the branching condition is satisfiable), then
> execution will split in two, and each branch will be explored seperately, with the branching
> condition (or its negation depending on which branch is being explored) being added as a constraint
> for that particular branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When executing the `add` method symbolically, calldata is represented as two abstract words,`x` and `y`, without further constraints. As we
proceed through the program we will encounter potential branching points, such as a
`JUMPI` instruction. At this point, we check which branches are reachable by checking if
the conjunction of all existing constraints and the branching condition is satisfiable. If both are reachable, then
execution will split in two, and each branch will be explored separately, with the branching
condition being added as a constraint for that particular branch.
```

| type           | prefix  | arguments | semantics                                                   |
|----------------|---------|-----------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| concrete       | `test`  | no        | single execution with concrete values                       |
| property based | `test`  | yes       | multiple executions with randomly generated concrete values |
| symbolic       | `prove` | optional  | exhaustive exploration of all possible exeuction paths      |

To illustrate the differences between the test types, consider the following example:

```solidity
contract Test is DSTest {
    function test_associativity() public {
        assertEq(
            uint((1 + 2) + 3),
            uint(1 + (2 + 3))
        );
    }

    function test_associativity_fuzz(uint x, uint y, uint z) public {
        assertEq(
            (x + y) + z,
            x + (y + z)
        );
    }

    function prove_associativity(uint x, uint y, uint z) public {
        assertEq(
          (x + y) + z,
          x + (y + z)
        );
    }
}
```

- `test_associativity` will run a single test case with the concrete values of `1`, `2`, and `3`.

> - `test_associativity_fuzz` will be executed many times (100 by default), with randomly generated values for `x`, `y`, and `z`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `test_associativity_fuzz` will be executed many times (100 by default), with randomly generated values for `x`, `y`, and `z` for each run.
```

- `prove_associativity` will be symbolically executed, with `x`, `y`, and `z` represented as symbolic variables.

Each one of these test types has an additional `fail` variant, which will pass when at least one of the assertions within the test is violated. This is indicated by prefixing the test name with `testFail` or `proveFail` (e.g. `testFail_associativity`). In the case of symbolic tests, there must be an assertion violation in every leaf on the exectuion tree for the `proveFail` test to pass.

Finally, it is possible to manipulate the execution environment (e.g. timestamp, block number,

> caller) from within `ds-test` by using hevm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
caller, or even arbitrary storage slots) from within `ds-test` by using hevm
```

Reviewer: ~caller happens to be non-manipulative with cheat codes~

Reviewer: ah, but you say environment vars further down.... doh

---
layout: post
published: true
title: Symbolic Execution With ds-test

> date: '2020-12-09'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: '2020-12-10'
```

Reviewer: also file name change

author: David Terry
category: 'Research & Development'
---

> The [latest release](https://github.com/dapphub/dapptools/releases/tag/hevm%2F0.43.0) of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [latest release](https://github.com/dapphub/dapptools/releases/tag/hevm%2F0.44.0) of
```

[`safeMul`](https://github.com/dapphub/ds-math/blob/master/src/math.sol#L25) can easily
involve both a multiplication and a division by a symbolic variable).

We hope to include optimizations in future releases of `hevm` that reduce the load on the solver
when executing contracts that make use of common non-linearities (`safeMul` included).

#### Symbolic Representation of Dynamic Types

`hevm` is currently unable to represent dynamic types (e.g. `bytes`, `string`) symbolically. Tests
that need symbolic representations of dynamic data will currently fail with an `Unsupported symbolic
abiencoding` error.

We intend to lift this restriction in a future release of `hevm`.

#### Symbolic Constructor Arguments

Contract bytecode is currently assumed by `hevm` to be completely concrete. As constructor arguments
are implemented on the EVM level by appending data to the contract's `creationCode`, symbolic
execution of contract constructors where the arguments are set to symbolic values will currently
fail with an `UnexpectedSymbolicArg` error.

We intend to lift this restriction in a future release of `hevm`.

> #### State Explosion

Reviewer: mention loops and `--max-iterations`?

Author: added sections for loops and unknown calls.
